.TH DTE 1 "October 2022"
.nh
.ad l
.
.SH NAME
dte \- A small, configurable text editor
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdte\fR
[\fB\-HR\fR]
[\fB\-c\fR \fIcommand\fR]
[\fB\-t\fR \fIctag\fR]
[\fB\-r\fR \fIrcfile\fR]
[[+\fIline\fR[,\fIcolumn\fR]] \fIfile\fR]...
.br
\fBdte\fR [\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-B\fR|\fB\-K\fR|\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-b\fR \fIrcname\fR|\fB\-s\fR \fIfile\fR]
.P
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fIcommand\fR
Run \fIcommand\fR, after reading the rc file and opening any \fIfile\fR
arguments. See \fBdterc\fR(5) for available commands.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-t\fR \fIctag\fR
Jump to source location of \fIctag\fR. Requires \fBtags\fR file generated
by \fBctags\fR(1).
.PP
.TP
\fB\-r\fR \fIrcfile\fR
Read configuration from \fIrcfile\fR instead of \fB~/.dte/rc\fR.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fIfile\fR
Load \fIfile\fR as a \fBdte\-syntax\fR(5) file and exit. Any errors
encountered are printed to \fBstderr\fR(3) and the exit status is
set appropriately.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-b\fR \fIrcname\fR
Dump the contents of the built\-in config or syntax file named
\fIrcname\fR and exit.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-B\fR
Print a list of all built\-in config names that can be used with the
\fB\-b\fR option and exit.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-H\fR
Don't load history files at startup or save history files on
exit (see below). History features will work as usual but will be
in\-memory only and not persisted to the filesystem.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-R\fR
Don't read the rc file.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-K\fR
Start in a special mode that continuously reads input and prints the
symbolic name of each pressed key.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
Display the help summary and exit.
.PP
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
Display the version number and exit.
.PP
+\fIline\fR,\fIcolumn\fR arguments can be used to specify the initial cursor
position of the next \fIfile\fR argument. These can also be specified in
the format +\fIline\fR:\fIcolumn\fR.
.P
.SH KEY BINDINGS
There are 3 editor modes, each having a different set of key bindings.
Bindings can be customized using the \fBbind\fR command (see \fBdterc\fR(5))
or displayed using the \fBshow bind\fR command.
.P
The key bindings listed below are in the same format as accepted by
the \fBbind\fR command. In particular, key combinations are represented
as follows:
.P
\(bu \fBM\-x\fR is Alt+x
.br
\(bu \fBC\-v\fR (or \fB^V\fR) is Ctrl+v
.br
\(bu \fBS\-left\fR is Shift+left
.br
\(bu \fBC\-M\-S\-left\fR is Ctrl+Alt+Shift+left
.br
.P
.SS Normal Mode
Normal mode is the mode the editor starts in. Pressing basic keys
(i.e. without modifiers) simply inserts text into the buffer. There
are also various key combinations bound by default:
.P
.TP
\fBS\-up\fR, \fBS\-down\fR, \fBS\-left\fR, \fBS\-right\fR
Move cursor and select characters
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-S\-left\fR, \fBC\-S\-right\fR
Move cursor and select whole words
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-S\-up\fR, \fBC\-S\-down\fR
Move cursor and select whole lines
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-c\fR
Copy current line or selection
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-x\fR
Cut current line or selection
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-v\fR
Paste
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-z\fR
Undo
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-y\fR
Redo
.PP
.TP
\fBM\-x\fR
Enter command mode
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-f\fR
Enter search mode
.PP
.TP
\fBF3\fR
Search next
.PP
.TP
\fBF4\fR
Search previous
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-t\fR, \fBC\-n\fR
Open new buffer
.PP
.TP
\fBM\-1\fR, \fBM\-2\fR ... \fBM\-9\fR
View buffer 1 (or 2, 3, 4, etc.)
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-w\fR
Close current buffer
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-s\fR
Save
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-q\fR
Quit
.PP
.SS Command Mode
Command mode allows running various editor commands using a language
similar to Unix shell and can be accessed by pressing \fBM\-x\fR (Alt+x)
in normal mode. The \fBnext\fR and \fBprev\fR commands switch to the
next/previous file. The \fBopen\fR, \fBsave\fR and \fBquit\fR commands
should be somewhat self\-explanatory. For a full list of available
commands, see \fBdterc\fR(5).
.P
The key bindings for command mode are:
.P
.TP
\fBup\fR, \fBdown\fR
Browse previous command history.
.PP
.TP
\fBtab\fR
Auto\-complete current command or argument
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-a\fR, \fBhome\fR
Go to beginning of command line
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-b\fR, \fBleft\fR
Move left
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-c\fR, \fBC\-g\fR, \fBEsc\fR
Exit command mode
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-d\fR, \fBdelete\fR
Delete
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-e\fR, \fBend\fR
Go to end of command line
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-f\fR, \fBright\fR
Move right
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-k\fR, \fBM\-delete\fR
Delete to end of command line
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-u\fR
Delete to beginning of command line
.PP
.TP
\fBC\-w\fR, \fBM\-C\-?\fR (Alt+Backspace)
Erase word
.PP
.SS Search Mode
Search mode allows entering a regular expression to \fBsearch\fR in the
current buffer and can be accessed by pressing \fBC\-f\fR (Ctrl+f) in
normal mode.
.P
The key bindings for search mode are mostly the same as in command mode,
plus these additional keys:
.P
.TP
\fBM\-c\fR
Toggle \fBcase\-sensitive\-search\fR option.
.PP
.TP
\fBM\-r\fR
Reverse search direction.
.PP
.TP
\fBEnter\fR
Perform \fBregex\fR(7) search.
.PP
.TP
\fBM\-Enter\fR
Perform plain\-text search (escapes the regex).
.PP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are inspected at startup:
.P
.TP
\fBDTE_HOME\fR
User configuration directory. Defaults to \fB$HOME/.dte\fR if not set.
.PP
.TP
\fBHOME\fR
User home directory. Used when expanding \fB~/\fR in filenames and also
to determine the default value for \fBDTE_HOME\fR.
.PP
.TP
\fBXDG_RUNTIME_DIR\fR
Directory used to store lock files. Defaults to
\fB$DTE_HOME\fR if not set.
.PP
.TP
\fBTERM\fR
Terminal identifier. Used to determine which terminal capabilities are
supported.
.PP
.TP
\fBCOLORTERM\fR
Enables support for 24\-bit terminal colors, if set to \fBtruecolor\fR or
\fB24bit\fR.
.PP
The following environment variables affect various library routines used
by dte:
.P
.TP
\fBPATH\fR
Colon\-delimited list of directory prefixes, as used by \fBexecvp\fR(3)
to find executables. This affects the \fBexec\fR and \fBcompile\fR
commands, but only when given a \fIcommand\fR argument containing
no slash characters (\fB/\fR).
.PP
.TP
\fBTZ\fR
Timezone specification, as used by \fBtzset\fR(3) to initialize time
conversion information. This affects file modification times shown
by the \fBshow buffer\fR command.
.PP
.TP
\fBLC_CTYPE\fR
\fBlocale\fR(7) specification for character types, as used by \fBregcomp\fR(3),
\fBtowlower\fR(3) and \fBtowupper\fR(3). This affects the behavior of the
\fBcase\fR command, any command that takes a \fBregex\fR(7) argument and
any \fBregex\fR(7) patterns used in search mode.
.PP
.TP
\fBLANG\fR
Fallback value for \fBLC_CTYPE\fR (see \fBlocale\fR(7) for details).
.PP
.TP
\fBLC_ALL\fR
Overrides \fBLC_CTYPE\fR and/or \fBLANG\fR, if set (see \fBlocale\fR(7) for details).
.PP
The following environment variables are set by dte:
.P
.TP
\fBDTE_VERSION\fR
Editor version string. This is set at startup to the same version
string as shown by \fBdte \-V | head \-n1\fR.
.PP
.TP
\fBPWD\fR
Absolute path of the current working directory; set when changing
directory with the \fBcd\fR command.
.PP
.TP
\fBOLDPWD\fR
Absolute path of the previous working directory; set when changing
directory with the \fBcd\fR command and also used to determine which
directory \fBcd \-\fR switches to.
.PP
.SH FILES
.TP
\fB$DTE_HOME/rc\fR
User configuration file. See \fBdterc\fR(5) for a full list of available
commands and options or run \fBdte \-b rc\fR to see
the built\-in, default config.
.PP
.TP
\fB$DTE_HOME/syntax/*\fR
User syntax files. These override the built\-in syntax files that
come with the program. See \fBdte\-syntax\fR(5) for more information or
run \fBdte \-b syntax/dte\fR for a basic example.
.PP
.TP
\fB$DTE_HOME/file\-history\fR
History of edited files and cursor positions. Used only if the
\fBfile\-history\fR option is enabled.
.PP
.TP
\fB$DTE_HOME/command\-history\fR
History of \fBdterc\fR(5) commands used while in command mode.
.PP
.TP
\fB$DTE_HOME/search\-history\fR
History of search patterns used while in search mode.
.PP
.TP
\fB$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/dte\-locks\fR
List of files currently open in a dte process (if the \fBlock\-files\fR
option is enabled).
.PP
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
\fB0\fR
Program exited normally.
.PP
.TP
\fB64\fR
Command\-line usage error (see "synopsis" above).
.PP
.TP
\fB65\fR
Input data error (e.g. data specified by the \fB\-s\fR option).
.PP
.TP
\fB71\fR
Operating system error.
.PP
.TP
\fB74\fR
Input/output error.
.PP
.TP
\fB78\fR
Configuration error.
.PP
Note: the above exit codes are set by the editor itself, with values in
accordance with \fBsysexits\fR(3). The exit code may also be set to values
in the range \fB0\fR..\fB125\fR by the \fBquit\fR command.
.P
.SH EXAMPLES
Open \fB/etc/passwd\fR with cursor on line 3, column 8:
.P
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
dte\ +3:8\ /etc/passwd
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Run several commands at startup:
.P
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
dte\ \-c\ 'set\ filetype\ sh;\ insert\ \-m\ "#!/bin/sh\\n"'
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Read a buffer from standard input:
.P
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
echo\ 'Hello,\ World!'\ |\ dte
\f[]
.fi
.PP
Interactively filter a shell pipeline:
.P
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
echo\ 'A\ B\ C\ D\ E\ F'\ |\ tr\ '\ '\ '\\n'\ |\ dte\ |\ tac
\f[]
.fi
.PP
.SH NOTES
It's advised to NOT run shell pipelines with multiple interactive
programs that try to control the terminal. For example:
.P
.IP
.nf
\f[C]
echo\ "Don't\ run\ this\ example!!"\ |\ dte\ |\ less
\f[]
.fi
.PP
A shell will run these processes in parallel and both \fBdte\fR(1) and \fBless\fR
will then try to control the terminal at the same time; clobbering the
input/output of both.
.P
.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBdterc\fR(5),
\fBdte\-syntax\fR(5)
.SH AUTHORS
Craig Barnes
.br
Timo Hirvonen
